Influenza virus vaccine, H1N1, live - Side Effects, Dosage, Interactions | Everyday Health  H1N1 influenza is sometimes called "swine flu" because it is usually found in pigs. You cannot become infected with H1N1 influenza from eating pork products. H1N1 influenza virus can spread from one person to another through small droplets of saliva that are expelled into the air when an infected person coughs or sneezes. The virus can also be passed through contact with objects the infected person has touched, such as a door handle or other surfaces. H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is used to prevent infection caused by the pandemic 2009 H1N1 influenza virus. The nasal H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is a "live virus" vaccine. H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is also available in an injectable form, which is a "killed virus" vaccine. H1N1 influenza virus vaccine works by exposing you to a small dose of the virus, which helps your body to develop immunity to the disease. This vaccine will not treat an active infection that has already developed in the body. H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine is for use in people between the ages of 2 years and 49 years. Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths. Like any medicine, this vaccine can cause side effects, but the risk of serious side effects is extremely low. Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu"). The nasal H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is a "live virus" vaccine. H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is also available in an injectable form, which is a "killed virus" vaccine. This medication guide addresses only the nasal form of this vaccine. H1N1 influenza is sometimes called "swine flu" because it is usually found in pigs. You cannot become infected with H1N1 influenza from eating pork products. Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin, or if you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin. Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have asthma, a weak immune system, or a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome or neurologic disorder affecting the brain (especially if these were caused by a vaccine). Also tell your doctor if you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours. You can still receive an H1N1 influenza vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine. Keep track of any and all side effects you have after receiving this vaccine. If you ever have to receive another influenza virus vaccine in the future, you will need to tell the doctor if the first vaccine caused any side effects. Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu"). Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths. Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, or: Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have: You can still receive a vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine. Vaccines may be harmful to an unborn baby and generally should not be given to a pregnant woman. However, not vaccinating the mother could be more harmful to the baby if the mother becomes infected with a disease that this vaccine could prevent. Your doctor will decide whether you should receive this vaccine. It is not known whether H1N1 influenza virus vaccine passes into breast milk or if it could harm a nursing baby. Do not use this medication without telling your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby. This vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age. The nasal form of H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is a "live virus" vaccine and may cause you to have mild flu-like symptoms. However, you may have flu-like symptoms at any time during flu season that may be caused by strains of influenza virus that are not contained in the vaccine. You should not receive a booster vaccine if you had a life-threatening allergic reaction after the first dose. Keep track of any and all side effects you have after receiving this vaccine. If you ever have to receive another H1N1 influenza virus vaccine in the future, you will need to tell the doctor if the first vaccine caused any side effects. Get emergency medical help if you have any of these signs of an allergic reaction: hives; difficulty breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat. Call your doctor at once if you have any of these serious side effects: Less serious side effects can last a day or two after you receive this vaccine and may include: This is not a complete list of side effects and others may occur. Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report vaccine side effects to the US Department of Health and Human Services at 1-800-822-7967. For at least 2 weeks after receiving this vaccine, avoid using antiviral medications that are normally used to treat flu symptoms, such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza). Before receiving this vaccine, tell the doctor about all other vaccines you have recently received. Also tell the doctor if you have recently received drugs or treatments that can weaken the immune system, including: This list is not complete and there may be other drugs that can affect this vaccine. Tell your doctor about all the prescription and over-the-counter medications you have received. This includes vitamins, minerals, herbal products, and drugs prescribed by other doctors. Do not start using a new medication without telling your doctor. This vaccine is given as a nasal spray into each nostril. Your doctor, nurse, or other healthcare provider will give you this vaccine. Children younger than 10 years old should receive two doses of H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine spaced one month apart. Older children and adults are usually given only one dose. Your doctor may recommend treating fever and pain with an aspirin-free pain reliever such as acetaminophen (Tylenol) or ibuprofen (Motrin, Advil, and others) after the vaccine is given. Follow the label directions or your doctor's instructions about how much of this medicine to take. It is especially important to prevent fever from occurring if you have a seizure disorder such as epilepsy. An overdose of this vaccine is unlikely to occur. If your child misses a booster dose of this vaccine, call your doctor for instructions. Be sure to receive all doses of this vaccine recommended by your healthcare provider or by the health department of the state where you live. If you do not receive the full series of vaccines, you may not be fully protected against the disease. Latest Update: 2017-09-15  Copyright © 2014 Everyday Health Media, LLC Drugs A-Z provides drug information from Everyday Health and our partners, as well as ratings from our members, all in one place. Cerner Multum™ provides the data within some of the Basics, Side Effects, Interactions, and Dosage tabs. The information within the Reviews and FAQ tabs is proprietary to Everyday Health. You can browse Drugs A-Z for a specific prescription or over-the-counter drug or look up drugs based on your specific condition. This information is for educational purposes only, and not meant to provide medical advice, treatment, or diagnosis. Remember to always consult your physician or health care provider before starting, stopping, or altering a treatment or health care regimen. Every effort has been made to ensure that the information provided by on this page is accurate, up-to-date, and complete, but no guarantee is made to that effect. Drug information contained herein may be time sensitive. The information on this page has been compiled for use by healthcare practitioners and consumers in the United States and therefore neither Everyday Health or its licensor warrant that uses outside of the United States are appropriate, unless specifically indicated otherwise. Neither Everyday Health nor its licensors endorse drugs, diagnose patients or recommend therapy. The drug information above is an informational resource designed to assist licensed healthcare practitioners in caring for their patients and/or to serve consumers viewing this service as a supplement to, and not a substitute for, the expertise, skill, knowledge and judgment of healthcare practitioners. The absence of a warning for a given drug or drug combination in no way should be construed to indicate that the drug or combination is safe, effective or appropriate for any given patient. Neither Everyday Health nor its licensor assume any responsibility for any aspect of healthcare administered with the aid of the information provided. The information contained herein is not intended to cover all possible uses, directions, precautions, warnings, drug interactions, allergic reactions, or adverse effects. If you have any questions about the drugs you are taking, check with your doctor, nurse or pharmacist. 