H1N1 Swine Flu Vaccine Side Effects, SafetyH1N1 Swine Flu Vaccine Safety: Hype, Myths, and FactsWhat do we really know about the 2009 H1N1 swine flu vaccine? What do we really not know?Questions about the safety of the vaccine persist. Surf the Internet or flip through TV stations and you'll encounter a multitude of myths and a whole lot of hype.What are the facts? Straightforward answers follow these questions:No vaccine is 100% safe for everyone. People with allergies to eggs, for example, can't take flu vaccines because eggs are involved in the manufacturing process.And flu vaccines cause mild but common reactions. About one in three people get a sore arm from the shot, some with a little redness or even swelling. Some 10% to 15% of people feel tired or get a headache; some may even run a low fever.And vaccines can trigger rare but serious reactions, even among people with no apparent allergies or sensitivities.So if vaccines aren't 100% safe, why risk them?Approved vaccines -- including the 2009 H1N1 swine flu vaccine -- are calculated to be much, much less risky than the diseases they prevent. For example, out of every million people who get a flu shot, one or two will get a serious neurological reaction called Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS).But flu itself causes serious problems, including GBS, in far more than two in a million cases. And since a large proportion of the population will get swine flu, the vaccine risk is far smaller than the disease risk.In clinical trials, 10,000 to 15,000 children and adults have received various manufacturers' brands of H1N1 swine flu vaccine. Nothing serious happened to any of them, including this reporter, who received a double dose of the Sanofi-Pasteur swine flu vaccine.That's still not proof that no harm will come from the vaccine. Clinical trials cannot detect something bad that happens to one or two out of every 100,000 people vaccinated."There could be unknown side effects. Something could happen. But we think that is highly unlikely," says infectious disease and vaccine expert Mark Mulligan, MD, executive director of the Hope Clinic of the Emory Vaccine Center in Atlanta."The CDC, FDA, HHS [Health and Human Services Department], the Department of Defense, and several large HMOs with great medical records are all collaborating in enhanced surveillance for this national 2009 H1N1 vaccine campaign," Mulligan tells WebMD. "If there is a signal for a rare or late adverse event, we will identify it as early and as quickly as we can."Is the swine flu vaccine brand new? Yes and no. The 2009 H1N1 swine flu vaccine is made exactly the same way as the seasonal flu vaccine, by the same manufacturers using the same materials -- except for one shiny new piece.What has changed is the piece of the virus the vaccine uses to prime the immune system.Vaccine experts tell WebMD this change isn't all that new. Every couple of years or so, a new variant of a seasonal flu virus comes along. When that happens, a "new" vaccine is made using the relevant part of the variant virus.And even though the 2009 H1N1 swine flu is a genuinely new virus, it's still closely related to seasonal flu bugs. One of the vaccines in the three-in-one seasonal flu vaccine protects against seasonal H1N1 flu, which is about 75% similar to the 2009 H1N1 swine flu -- although it offers no protection against the pandemic flu.Last year, some 100 million people got the seasonal flu vaccine. No safety issues appeared. That's reassuring, but it's no proof that something rare and unexpected can't happen.There's no denying that the virus particle used in the vaccine has never been used before. No scientific calculation can rule out the chance that something unexpected might happen.But one can calculate that this chance will be small. And the chance that the vaccine will prevent serious illness and deaths is very, very large.The public health agenda is to promote healthy practices -- such as eating wholesome foods and quitting smoking -- that not everyone likes. Why? Science suggests that these policies save lives and cut health care costs.The public health agenda also promotes vaccination against disease -- even though the rare individual is harmed by a vaccine. Why? Science suggests such a policy saves lives and cuts health care costs, as long as disease risks outweigh vaccination risks. A good example is the smallpox vaccine, which eradicated one of the scourges of mankind, even though a number of people were harmed by the vaccine.After weighing the benefits vs. the risks, the health agencies of the U.S. government have launched the most massive vaccination campaign in history to fight the 2009 H1N1 swine flu. The CDC is using simple, direct messages -- including advertising and press conferences -- to encourage people to get the vaccine."In public health, you have to have campaigns and try to talk people into things," Mulligan tells WebMD. "The question about the government is a very important one. But things have changed since the old days of the Tuskegee syphilis experiment. Now we have very strict regulation of government research. People can trust and believe that this is not politicians talking, but researchers presenting evidence-based recommendations."The 2009 H1N1 swine flu vaccine comes in three basic types: the FluMist nasal spray, single-syringe shots, and multi-shot vials.Only the multi-shot vials contain thimerosal, a preservative that prevents bacterial contamination of the vial. Before thimerosal was added to vaccines, there were occasional vaccine injuries due to contamination.Extensive study shows that there are no more adverse events in children or adults who receive thimerosal-containing vaccines than in those who do not.But thimerosal contains a form of mercury. It's ethyl mercury, which is likely not as toxic as some other forms. Even so, nobody argues that mercury is good for your body. People who want to avoid thimerosal-containing flu vaccines must get the FluMist vaccine or the single-syringe shots.Most people should have this choice. But single-syringe vaccines may not be available for every person in every location during every week of the vaccination campaign.The 1976 swine flu vaccine was linked to safety issues. Neal Halsey, MD, director of the Institute for Vaccine Safety at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, was at the CDC in those days."We did identify an increased risk of GBS [Guillain-Barre syndrome] in the six weeks following immunization," Halsey tells WebMD. "What is not known at this time is exactly why that vaccine was associated with that increased risk."No flu vaccine since then has been linked to this risk. Halsey thinks there is the potential for the H1N1 flu vaccine to carry a risk of causing one case of GBS per million people vaccinated."The theoretical risk of that rare complication has to be balanced against the severity of the H1N1 flu," he says. "There already have been a lot of deaths, many in otherwise healthy, normal children. There is always a real risk from the flu, and a theoretical risk from the vaccines."In 1976, the risk from flu was theoretical, too. Despite a scary and fatal outbreak of an H1N1 swine flu at a military base, the virus never spread.The 1976 H1N1 swine flu was a very different virus from the 2009 H1N1 swine flu, which combines elements from flu viruses that evolved in birds, humans, and pigs. And unlike the 1976 virus, the 2009 bug is causing a very real pandemic.Vaccine labels are not easy to read. But they are made public by the FDA and other sources. If you want to know exactly what's in each kind of 2009 H1N1 swine flu vaccine, read the label. You can find all the labels here: http://www.vaccinesafety.edu/package_inserts.htm.SOURCES:WebMD: "H1N1 Swine Flu
Guide."Neal Halsey, MD, director, Institute for Vaccine Safety, Johns Hopkins
Bloomberg School of Public Health.Mark Mulligan, MD, executive director, Hope Clinic, Emory Vaccine Center,
Atlanta.Institute for Vaccine Safety web site.Pagination15 tips to help you feel better.Do echinacea and vitamin C really help a cold?Get a good night’s rest with these remedies.Eat these to fight colds, flu, and more.© 2005 - 2019 WebMD LLC. All rights reserved.WebMD does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment.See additional information.Influenza virus vaccine, H1N1, live - Side Effects, Dosage, Interactions | Everyday HealthH1N1 influenza is sometimes called "swine flu" because it is usually found in pigs. You cannot become infected with H1N1 influenza from eating pork products.H1N1 influenza virus can spread from one person to another through small droplets of saliva that are expelled into the air when an infected person coughs or sneezes. The virus can also be passed through contact with objects the infected person has touched, such as a door handle or other surfaces.H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is used to prevent infection caused by the pandemic 2009 H1N1 influenza virus.The nasal H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is a "live virus" vaccine. H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is also available in an injectable form, which is a "killed virus" vaccine.H1N1 influenza virus vaccine works by exposing you to a small dose of the virus, which helps your body to develop immunity to the disease. This vaccine will not treat an active infection that has already developed in the body.H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine is for use in people between the ages of 2 years and 49 years.Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths. Like any medicine, this vaccine can cause side effects, but the risk of serious side effects is extremely low.Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").The nasal H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is a "live virus" vaccine. H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is also available in an injectable form, which is a "killed virus" vaccine. This medication guide addresses only the nasal form of this vaccine.H1N1 influenza is sometimes called "swine flu" because it is usually found in pigs. You cannot become infected with H1N1 influenza from eating pork products.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin, or if you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have asthma, a weak immune system, or a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome or neurologic disorder affecting the brain (especially if these were caused by a vaccine).Also tell your doctor if you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive an H1N1 influenza vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Keep track of any and all side effects you have after receiving this vaccine. If you ever have to receive another influenza virus vaccine in the future, you will need to tell the doctor if the first vaccine caused any side effects.Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, or:if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin or other similar medicines such as Disalcid, Doan's Pills, Dolobid, Salflex, Tricosal, and others; orif you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have:asthma or wheezing (especially in children younger than 5 years old);a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome (especially if you had it within 6 weeks after having a flu vaccine);a weak immune system caused by disease, bone marrow transplant, or by using certain medicines or receiving cancer treatments;a neurologic disorder or disease affecting the brain (or if this was a reaction to a previous vaccine); orif you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive a vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Vaccines may be harmful to an unborn baby and generally should not be given to a pregnant woman. However, not vaccinating the mother could be more harmful to the baby if the mother becomes infected with a disease that this vaccine could prevent. Your doctor will decide whether you should receive this vaccine.It is not known whether H1N1 influenza virus vaccine passes into breast milk or if it could harm a nursing baby. Do not use this medication without telling your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby.This vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age.BasicDescription Back to TopH1N1 influenza virus can spread from one person to another through small droplets of saliva that are expelled into the air when an infected person coughs or sneezes. The virus can also be passed through contact with objects the infected person has touched, such as a door handle or other surfaces.H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is used to prevent infection caused by the pandemic 2009 H1N1 influenza virus.The nasal H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is a "live virus" vaccine. H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is also available in an injectable form, which is a "killed virus" vaccine.H1N1 influenza virus vaccine works by exposing you to a small dose of the virus, which helps your body to develop immunity to the disease. This vaccine will not treat an active infection that has already developed in the body.H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine is for use in people between the ages of 2 years and 49 years.Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths. Like any medicine, this vaccine can cause side effects, but the risk of serious side effects is extremely low.Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").The nasal H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is a "live virus" vaccine. H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is also available in an injectable form, which is a "killed virus" vaccine. This medication guide addresses only the nasal form of this vaccine.H1N1 influenza is sometimes called "swine flu" because it is usually found in pigs. You cannot become infected with H1N1 influenza from eating pork products.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin, or if you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have asthma, a weak immune system, or a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome or neurologic disorder affecting the brain (especially if these were caused by a vaccine).Also tell your doctor if you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive an H1N1 influenza vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Keep track of any and all side effects you have after receiving this vaccine. If you ever have to receive another influenza virus vaccine in the future, you will need to tell the doctor if the first vaccine caused any side effects.Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, or:if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin or other similar medicines such as Disalcid, Doan's Pills, Dolobid, Salflex, Tricosal, and others; orif you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have:asthma or wheezing (especially in children younger than 5 years old);a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome (especially if you had it within 6 weeks after having a flu vaccine);a weak immune system caused by disease, bone marrow transplant, or by using certain medicines or receiving cancer treatments;a neurologic disorder or disease affecting the brain (or if this was a reaction to a previous vaccine); orif you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive a vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Vaccines may be harmful to an unborn baby and generally should not be given to a pregnant woman. However, not vaccinating the mother could be more harmful to the baby if the mother becomes infected with a disease that this vaccine could prevent. Your doctor will decide whether you should receive this vaccine.It is not known whether H1N1 influenza virus vaccine passes into breast milk or if it could harm a nursing baby. Do not use this medication without telling your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby.This vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age.BasicDescription Back to TopH1N1 influenza virus vaccine is used to prevent infection caused by the pandemic 2009 H1N1 influenza virus.The nasal H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is a "live virus" vaccine. H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is also available in an injectable form, which is a "killed virus" vaccine.H1N1 influenza virus vaccine works by exposing you to a small dose of the virus, which helps your body to develop immunity to the disease. This vaccine will not treat an active infection that has already developed in the body.H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine is for use in people between the ages of 2 years and 49 years.Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths. Like any medicine, this vaccine can cause side effects, but the risk of serious side effects is extremely low.Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").The nasal H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is a "live virus" vaccine. H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is also available in an injectable form, which is a "killed virus" vaccine. This medication guide addresses only the nasal form of this vaccine.H1N1 influenza is sometimes called "swine flu" because it is usually found in pigs. You cannot become infected with H1N1 influenza from eating pork products.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin, or if you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have asthma, a weak immune system, or a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome or neurologic disorder affecting the brain (especially if these were caused by a vaccine).Also tell your doctor if you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive an H1N1 influenza vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Keep track of any and all side effects you have after receiving this vaccine. If you ever have to receive another influenza virus vaccine in the future, you will need to tell the doctor if the first vaccine caused any side effects.Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, or:if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin or other similar medicines such as Disalcid, Doan's Pills, Dolobid, Salflex, Tricosal, and others; orif you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have:asthma or wheezing (especially in children younger than 5 years old);a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome (especially if you had it within 6 weeks after having a flu vaccine);a weak immune system caused by disease, bone marrow transplant, or by using certain medicines or receiving cancer treatments;a neurologic disorder or disease affecting the brain (or if this was a reaction to a previous vaccine); orif you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive a vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Vaccines may be harmful to an unborn baby and generally should not be given to a pregnant woman. However, not vaccinating the mother could be more harmful to the baby if the mother becomes infected with a disease that this vaccine could prevent. Your doctor will decide whether you should receive this vaccine.It is not known whether H1N1 influenza virus vaccine passes into breast milk or if it could harm a nursing baby. Do not use this medication without telling your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby.This vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age.BasicDescription Back to TopThe nasal H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is a "live virus" vaccine. H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is also available in an injectable form, which is a "killed virus" vaccine.H1N1 influenza virus vaccine works by exposing you to a small dose of the virus, which helps your body to develop immunity to the disease. This vaccine will not treat an active infection that has already developed in the body.H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine is for use in people between the ages of 2 years and 49 years.Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths. Like any medicine, this vaccine can cause side effects, but the risk of serious side effects is extremely low.Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").The nasal H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is a "live virus" vaccine. H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is also available in an injectable form, which is a "killed virus" vaccine. This medication guide addresses only the nasal form of this vaccine.H1N1 influenza is sometimes called "swine flu" because it is usually found in pigs. You cannot become infected with H1N1 influenza from eating pork products.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin, or if you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have asthma, a weak immune system, or a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome or neurologic disorder affecting the brain (especially if these were caused by a vaccine).Also tell your doctor if you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive an H1N1 influenza vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Keep track of any and all side effects you have after receiving this vaccine. If you ever have to receive another influenza virus vaccine in the future, you will need to tell the doctor if the first vaccine caused any side effects.Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, or:if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin or other similar medicines such as Disalcid, Doan's Pills, Dolobid, Salflex, Tricosal, and others; orif you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have:asthma or wheezing (especially in children younger than 5 years old);a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome (especially if you had it within 6 weeks after having a flu vaccine);a weak immune system caused by disease, bone marrow transplant, or by using certain medicines or receiving cancer treatments;a neurologic disorder or disease affecting the brain (or if this was a reaction to a previous vaccine); orif you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive a vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Vaccines may be harmful to an unborn baby and generally should not be given to a pregnant woman. However, not vaccinating the mother could be more harmful to the baby if the mother becomes infected with a disease that this vaccine could prevent. Your doctor will decide whether you should receive this vaccine.It is not known whether H1N1 influenza virus vaccine passes into breast milk or if it could harm a nursing baby. Do not use this medication without telling your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby.This vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age.BasicDescription Back to TopH1N1 influenza virus vaccine works by exposing you to a small dose of the virus, which helps your body to develop immunity to the disease. This vaccine will not treat an active infection that has already developed in the body.H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine is for use in people between the ages of 2 years and 49 years.Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths. Like any medicine, this vaccine can cause side effects, but the risk of serious side effects is extremely low.Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").The nasal H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is a "live virus" vaccine. H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is also available in an injectable form, which is a "killed virus" vaccine. This medication guide addresses only the nasal form of this vaccine.H1N1 influenza is sometimes called "swine flu" because it is usually found in pigs. You cannot become infected with H1N1 influenza from eating pork products.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin, or if you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have asthma, a weak immune system, or a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome or neurologic disorder affecting the brain (especially if these were caused by a vaccine).Also tell your doctor if you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive an H1N1 influenza vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Keep track of any and all side effects you have after receiving this vaccine. If you ever have to receive another influenza virus vaccine in the future, you will need to tell the doctor if the first vaccine caused any side effects.Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, or:if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin or other similar medicines such as Disalcid, Doan's Pills, Dolobid, Salflex, Tricosal, and others; orif you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have:asthma or wheezing (especially in children younger than 5 years old);a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome (especially if you had it within 6 weeks after having a flu vaccine);a weak immune system caused by disease, bone marrow transplant, or by using certain medicines or receiving cancer treatments;a neurologic disorder or disease affecting the brain (or if this was a reaction to a previous vaccine); orif you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive a vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Vaccines may be harmful to an unborn baby and generally should not be given to a pregnant woman. However, not vaccinating the mother could be more harmful to the baby if the mother becomes infected with a disease that this vaccine could prevent. Your doctor will decide whether you should receive this vaccine.It is not known whether H1N1 influenza virus vaccine passes into breast milk or if it could harm a nursing baby. Do not use this medication without telling your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby.This vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age.BasicDescription Back to TopH1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine is for use in people between the ages of 2 years and 49 years.Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths. Like any medicine, this vaccine can cause side effects, but the risk of serious side effects is extremely low.Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").The nasal H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is a "live virus" vaccine. H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is also available in an injectable form, which is a "killed virus" vaccine. This medication guide addresses only the nasal form of this vaccine.H1N1 influenza is sometimes called "swine flu" because it is usually found in pigs. You cannot become infected with H1N1 influenza from eating pork products.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin, or if you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have asthma, a weak immune system, or a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome or neurologic disorder affecting the brain (especially if these were caused by a vaccine).Also tell your doctor if you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive an H1N1 influenza vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Keep track of any and all side effects you have after receiving this vaccine. If you ever have to receive another influenza virus vaccine in the future, you will need to tell the doctor if the first vaccine caused any side effects.Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, or:if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin or other similar medicines such as Disalcid, Doan's Pills, Dolobid, Salflex, Tricosal, and others; orif you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have:asthma or wheezing (especially in children younger than 5 years old);a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome (especially if you had it within 6 weeks after having a flu vaccine);a weak immune system caused by disease, bone marrow transplant, or by using certain medicines or receiving cancer treatments;a neurologic disorder or disease affecting the brain (or if this was a reaction to a previous vaccine); orif you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive a vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Vaccines may be harmful to an unborn baby and generally should not be given to a pregnant woman. However, not vaccinating the mother could be more harmful to the baby if the mother becomes infected with a disease that this vaccine could prevent. Your doctor will decide whether you should receive this vaccine.It is not known whether H1N1 influenza virus vaccine passes into breast milk or if it could harm a nursing baby. Do not use this medication without telling your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby.This vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age.BasicDescription Back to TopBecoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths. Like any medicine, this vaccine can cause side effects, but the risk of serious side effects is extremely low.Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").The nasal H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is a "live virus" vaccine. H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is also available in an injectable form, which is a "killed virus" vaccine. This medication guide addresses only the nasal form of this vaccine.H1N1 influenza is sometimes called "swine flu" because it is usually found in pigs. You cannot become infected with H1N1 influenza from eating pork products.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin, or if you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have asthma, a weak immune system, or a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome or neurologic disorder affecting the brain (especially if these were caused by a vaccine).Also tell your doctor if you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive an H1N1 influenza vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Keep track of any and all side effects you have after receiving this vaccine. If you ever have to receive another influenza virus vaccine in the future, you will need to tell the doctor if the first vaccine caused any side effects.Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, or:if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin or other similar medicines such as Disalcid, Doan's Pills, Dolobid, Salflex, Tricosal, and others; orif you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have:asthma or wheezing (especially in children younger than 5 years old);a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome (especially if you had it within 6 weeks after having a flu vaccine);a weak immune system caused by disease, bone marrow transplant, or by using certain medicines or receiving cancer treatments;a neurologic disorder or disease affecting the brain (or if this was a reaction to a previous vaccine); orif you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive a vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Vaccines may be harmful to an unborn baby and generally should not be given to a pregnant woman. However, not vaccinating the mother could be more harmful to the baby if the mother becomes infected with a disease that this vaccine could prevent. Your doctor will decide whether you should receive this vaccine.It is not known whether H1N1 influenza virus vaccine passes into breast milk or if it could harm a nursing baby. Do not use this medication without telling your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby.This vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age.BasicDescription Back to TopLike any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").The nasal H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is a "live virus" vaccine. H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is also available in an injectable form, which is a "killed virus" vaccine. This medication guide addresses only the nasal form of this vaccine.H1N1 influenza is sometimes called "swine flu" because it is usually found in pigs. You cannot become infected with H1N1 influenza from eating pork products.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin, or if you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have asthma, a weak immune system, or a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome or neurologic disorder affecting the brain (especially if these were caused by a vaccine).Also tell your doctor if you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive an H1N1 influenza vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Keep track of any and all side effects you have after receiving this vaccine. If you ever have to receive another influenza virus vaccine in the future, you will need to tell the doctor if the first vaccine caused any side effects.Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, or:if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin or other similar medicines such as Disalcid, Doan's Pills, Dolobid, Salflex, Tricosal, and others; orif you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have:asthma or wheezing (especially in children younger than 5 years old);a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome (especially if you had it within 6 weeks after having a flu vaccine);a weak immune system caused by disease, bone marrow transplant, or by using certain medicines or receiving cancer treatments;a neurologic disorder or disease affecting the brain (or if this was a reaction to a previous vaccine); orif you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive a vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Vaccines may be harmful to an unborn baby and generally should not be given to a pregnant woman. However, not vaccinating the mother could be more harmful to the baby if the mother becomes infected with a disease that this vaccine could prevent. Your doctor will decide whether you should receive this vaccine.It is not known whether H1N1 influenza virus vaccine passes into breast milk or if it could harm a nursing baby. Do not use this medication without telling your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby.This vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age.BasicDescription Back to TopThe nasal H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is a "live virus" vaccine. H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is also available in an injectable form, which is a "killed virus" vaccine. This medication guide addresses only the nasal form of this vaccine.H1N1 influenza is sometimes called "swine flu" because it is usually found in pigs. You cannot become infected with H1N1 influenza from eating pork products.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin, or if you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have asthma, a weak immune system, or a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome or neurologic disorder affecting the brain (especially if these were caused by a vaccine).Also tell your doctor if you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive an H1N1 influenza vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Keep track of any and all side effects you have after receiving this vaccine. If you ever have to receive another influenza virus vaccine in the future, you will need to tell the doctor if the first vaccine caused any side effects.Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, or:if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin or other similar medicines such as Disalcid, Doan's Pills, Dolobid, Salflex, Tricosal, and others; orif you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have:asthma or wheezing (especially in children younger than 5 years old);a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome (especially if you had it within 6 weeks after having a flu vaccine);a weak immune system caused by disease, bone marrow transplant, or by using certain medicines or receiving cancer treatments;a neurologic disorder or disease affecting the brain (or if this was a reaction to a previous vaccine); orif you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive a vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Vaccines may be harmful to an unborn baby and generally should not be given to a pregnant woman. However, not vaccinating the mother could be more harmful to the baby if the mother becomes infected with a disease that this vaccine could prevent. Your doctor will decide whether you should receive this vaccine.It is not known whether H1N1 influenza virus vaccine passes into breast milk or if it could harm a nursing baby. Do not use this medication without telling your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby.This vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age.BasicDescription Back to TopH1N1 influenza is sometimes called "swine flu" because it is usually found in pigs. You cannot become infected with H1N1 influenza from eating pork products.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin, or if you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have asthma, a weak immune system, or a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome or neurologic disorder affecting the brain (especially if these were caused by a vaccine).Also tell your doctor if you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive an H1N1 influenza vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Keep track of any and all side effects you have after receiving this vaccine. If you ever have to receive another influenza virus vaccine in the future, you will need to tell the doctor if the first vaccine caused any side effects.Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, or:if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin or other similar medicines such as Disalcid, Doan's Pills, Dolobid, Salflex, Tricosal, and others; orif you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have:asthma or wheezing (especially in children younger than 5 years old);a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome (especially if you had it within 6 weeks after having a flu vaccine);a weak immune system caused by disease, bone marrow transplant, or by using certain medicines or receiving cancer treatments;a neurologic disorder or disease affecting the brain (or if this was a reaction to a previous vaccine); orif you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive a vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Vaccines may be harmful to an unborn baby and generally should not be given to a pregnant woman. However, not vaccinating the mother could be more harmful to the baby if the mother becomes infected with a disease that this vaccine could prevent. Your doctor will decide whether you should receive this vaccine.It is not known whether H1N1 influenza virus vaccine passes into breast milk or if it could harm a nursing baby. Do not use this medication without telling your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby.This vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age.BasicDescription Back to TopDo not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin, or if you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have asthma, a weak immune system, or a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome or neurologic disorder affecting the brain (especially if these were caused by a vaccine).Also tell your doctor if you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive an H1N1 influenza vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Keep track of any and all side effects you have after receiving this vaccine. If you ever have to receive another influenza virus vaccine in the future, you will need to tell the doctor if the first vaccine caused any side effects.Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, or:if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin or other similar medicines such as Disalcid, Doan's Pills, Dolobid, Salflex, Tricosal, and others; orif you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have:asthma or wheezing (especially in children younger than 5 years old);a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome (especially if you had it within 6 weeks after having a flu vaccine);a weak immune system caused by disease, bone marrow transplant, or by using certain medicines or receiving cancer treatments;a neurologic disorder or disease affecting the brain (or if this was a reaction to a previous vaccine); orif you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive a vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Vaccines may be harmful to an unborn baby and generally should not be given to a pregnant woman. However, not vaccinating the mother could be more harmful to the baby if the mother becomes infected with a disease that this vaccine could prevent. Your doctor will decide whether you should receive this vaccine.It is not known whether H1N1 influenza virus vaccine passes into breast milk or if it could harm a nursing baby. Do not use this medication without telling your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby.This vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age.BasicDescription Back to TopBefore you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have asthma, a weak immune system, or a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome or neurologic disorder affecting the brain (especially if these were caused by a vaccine).Also tell your doctor if you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive an H1N1 influenza vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Keep track of any and all side effects you have after receiving this vaccine. If you ever have to receive another influenza virus vaccine in the future, you will need to tell the doctor if the first vaccine caused any side effects.Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, or:if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin or other similar medicines such as Disalcid, Doan's Pills, Dolobid, Salflex, Tricosal, and others; orif you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have:asthma or wheezing (especially in children younger than 5 years old);a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome (especially if you had it within 6 weeks after having a flu vaccine);a weak immune system caused by disease, bone marrow transplant, or by using certain medicines or receiving cancer treatments;a neurologic disorder or disease affecting the brain (or if this was a reaction to a previous vaccine); orif you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive a vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Vaccines may be harmful to an unborn baby and generally should not be given to a pregnant woman. However, not vaccinating the mother could be more harmful to the baby if the mother becomes infected with a disease that this vaccine could prevent. Your doctor will decide whether you should receive this vaccine.It is not known whether H1N1 influenza virus vaccine passes into breast milk or if it could harm a nursing baby. Do not use this medication without telling your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby.This vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age.BasicDescription Back to TopAlso tell your doctor if you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive an H1N1 influenza vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Keep track of any and all side effects you have after receiving this vaccine. If you ever have to receive another influenza virus vaccine in the future, you will need to tell the doctor if the first vaccine caused any side effects.Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, or:if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin or other similar medicines such as Disalcid, Doan's Pills, Dolobid, Salflex, Tricosal, and others; orif you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have:asthma or wheezing (especially in children younger than 5 years old);a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome (especially if you had it within 6 weeks after having a flu vaccine);a weak immune system caused by disease, bone marrow transplant, or by using certain medicines or receiving cancer treatments;a neurologic disorder or disease affecting the brain (or if this was a reaction to a previous vaccine); orif you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive a vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Vaccines may be harmful to an unborn baby and generally should not be given to a pregnant woman. However, not vaccinating the mother could be more harmful to the baby if the mother becomes infected with a disease that this vaccine could prevent. Your doctor will decide whether you should receive this vaccine.It is not known whether H1N1 influenza virus vaccine passes into breast milk or if it could harm a nursing baby. Do not use this medication without telling your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby.This vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age.BasicDescription Back to TopYou can still receive an H1N1 influenza vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Keep track of any and all side effects you have after receiving this vaccine. If you ever have to receive another influenza virus vaccine in the future, you will need to tell the doctor if the first vaccine caused any side effects.Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, or:if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin or other similar medicines such as Disalcid, Doan's Pills, Dolobid, Salflex, Tricosal, and others; orif you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have:asthma or wheezing (especially in children younger than 5 years old);a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome (especially if you had it within 6 weeks after having a flu vaccine);a weak immune system caused by disease, bone marrow transplant, or by using certain medicines or receiving cancer treatments;a neurologic disorder or disease affecting the brain (or if this was a reaction to a previous vaccine); orif you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive a vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Vaccines may be harmful to an unborn baby and generally should not be given to a pregnant woman. However, not vaccinating the mother could be more harmful to the baby if the mother becomes infected with a disease that this vaccine could prevent. Your doctor will decide whether you should receive this vaccine.It is not known whether H1N1 influenza virus vaccine passes into breast milk or if it could harm a nursing baby. Do not use this medication without telling your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby.This vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age.BasicDescription Back to TopKeep track of any and all side effects you have after receiving this vaccine. If you ever have to receive another influenza virus vaccine in the future, you will need to tell the doctor if the first vaccine caused any side effects.Like any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, or:if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin or other similar medicines such as Disalcid, Doan's Pills, Dolobid, Salflex, Tricosal, and others; orif you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have:asthma or wheezing (especially in children younger than 5 years old);a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome (especially if you had it within 6 weeks after having a flu vaccine);a weak immune system caused by disease, bone marrow transplant, or by using certain medicines or receiving cancer treatments;a neurologic disorder or disease affecting the brain (or if this was a reaction to a previous vaccine); orif you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive a vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Vaccines may be harmful to an unborn baby and generally should not be given to a pregnant woman. However, not vaccinating the mother could be more harmful to the baby if the mother becomes infected with a disease that this vaccine could prevent. Your doctor will decide whether you should receive this vaccine.It is not known whether H1N1 influenza virus vaccine passes into breast milk or if it could harm a nursing baby. Do not use this medication without telling your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby.This vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age.BasicDescription Back to TopLike any vaccine, H1N1 influenza virus vaccine may not provide protection from disease in every person. This vaccine will not prevent illness caused by avian flu ("bird flu").Becoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, or:if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin or other similar medicines such as Disalcid, Doan's Pills, Dolobid, Salflex, Tricosal, and others; orif you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have:asthma or wheezing (especially in children younger than 5 years old);a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome (especially if you had it within 6 weeks after having a flu vaccine);a weak immune system caused by disease, bone marrow transplant, or by using certain medicines or receiving cancer treatments;a neurologic disorder or disease affecting the brain (or if this was a reaction to a previous vaccine); orif you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive a vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Vaccines may be harmful to an unborn baby and generally should not be given to a pregnant woman. However, not vaccinating the mother could be more harmful to the baby if the mother becomes infected with a disease that this vaccine could prevent. Your doctor will decide whether you should receive this vaccine.It is not known whether H1N1 influenza virus vaccine passes into breast milk or if it could harm a nursing baby. Do not use this medication without telling your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby.This vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age.BasicDescription Back to TopBecoming infected with influenza is much more dangerous to your health than receiving the vaccine to protect against it. Most people with H1N1 influenza have recovered, but the virus has caused some deaths.Do not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, or:if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin or other similar medicines such as Disalcid, Doan's Pills, Dolobid, Salflex, Tricosal, and others; orif you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have:asthma or wheezing (especially in children younger than 5 years old);a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome (especially if you had it within 6 weeks after having a flu vaccine);a weak immune system caused by disease, bone marrow transplant, or by using certain medicines or receiving cancer treatments;a neurologic disorder or disease affecting the brain (or if this was a reaction to a previous vaccine); orif you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive a vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Vaccines may be harmful to an unborn baby and generally should not be given to a pregnant woman. However, not vaccinating the mother could be more harmful to the baby if the mother becomes infected with a disease that this vaccine could prevent. Your doctor will decide whether you should receive this vaccine.It is not known whether H1N1 influenza virus vaccine passes into breast milk or if it could harm a nursing baby. Do not use this medication without telling your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby.This vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age.BasicDescription Back to TopDo not receive this vaccine if you have ever had an allergic reaction to a flu vaccine, or:if you are under 18 years old and have recently taken aspirin or other similar medicines such as Disalcid, Doan's Pills, Dolobid, Salflex, Tricosal, and others; orif you are allergic to eggs, arginine, or gelatin.Before you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have:asthma or wheezing (especially in children younger than 5 years old);a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome (especially if you had it within 6 weeks after having a flu vaccine);a weak immune system caused by disease, bone marrow transplant, or by using certain medicines or receiving cancer treatments;a neurologic disorder or disease affecting the brain (or if this was a reaction to a previous vaccine); orif you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive a vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Vaccines may be harmful to an unborn baby and generally should not be given to a pregnant woman. However, not vaccinating the mother could be more harmful to the baby if the mother becomes infected with a disease that this vaccine could prevent. Your doctor will decide whether you should receive this vaccine.It is not known whether H1N1 influenza virus vaccine passes into breast milk or if it could harm a nursing baby. Do not use this medication without telling your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby.This vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age.BasicDescription Back to TopBefore you receive H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine, tell your doctor if you have:asthma or wheezing (especially in children younger than 5 years old);a history of Guillain-Barré syndrome (especially if you had it within 6 weeks after having a flu vaccine);a weak immune system caused by disease, bone marrow transplant, or by using certain medicines or receiving cancer treatments;a neurologic disorder or disease affecting the brain (or if this was a reaction to a previous vaccine); orif you have used a flu medication such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza) within the past 48 hours.You can still receive a vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Vaccines may be harmful to an unborn baby and generally should not be given to a pregnant woman. However, not vaccinating the mother could be more harmful to the baby if the mother becomes infected with a disease that this vaccine could prevent. Your doctor will decide whether you should receive this vaccine.It is not known whether H1N1 influenza virus vaccine passes into breast milk or if it could harm a nursing baby. Do not use this medication without telling your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby.This vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age.BasicDescription Back to TopYou can still receive a vaccine if you have a cold or fever. In the case of a more severe illness with a fever or any type of infection, wait until you get better before receiving this vaccine.Vaccines may be harmful to an unborn baby and generally should not be given to a pregnant woman. However, not vaccinating the mother could be more harmful to the baby if the mother becomes infected with a disease that this vaccine could prevent. Your doctor will decide whether you should receive this vaccine.It is not known whether H1N1 influenza virus vaccine passes into breast milk or if it could harm a nursing baby. Do not use this medication without telling your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby.This vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age.BasicDescription Back to TopVaccines may be harmful to an unborn baby and generally should not be given to a pregnant woman. However, not vaccinating the mother could be more harmful to the baby if the mother becomes infected with a disease that this vaccine could prevent. Your doctor will decide whether you should receive this vaccine.It is not known whether H1N1 influenza virus vaccine passes into breast milk or if it could harm a nursing baby. Do not use this medication without telling your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby.This vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age.BasicDescription Back to TopIt is not known whether H1N1 influenza virus vaccine passes into breast milk or if it could harm a nursing baby. Do not use this medication without telling your doctor if you are breast-feeding a baby.This vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age.BasicDescription Back to TopThis vaccine should not be given to anyone younger than 2 or older than 49 years of age.BasicDescription Back to TopThe nasal form of H1N1 influenza virus vaccine is a "live virus" vaccine and may cause you to have mild flu-like symptoms. However, you may have flu-like symptoms at any time during flu season that may be caused by strains of influenza virus that are not contained in the vaccine.You should not receive a booster vaccine if you had a life-threatening allergic reaction after the first dose.Keep track of any and all side effects you have after receiving this vaccine. If you ever have to receive another H1N1 influenza virus vaccine in the future, you will need to tell the doctor if the first vaccine caused any side effects.Get emergency medical help if you have any of these signs of an allergic reaction: hives; difficulty breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.Call your doctor at once if you have any of these serious side effects:wheezing, trouble breathing;weakness, numbness or tingly feeling in your feet and spreading upward; orhigh fever, chills, body aches, flu symptoms.Less serious side effects can last a day or two after you receive this vaccine and may include:runny or stuffy nose, sneezing;low fever;stomach pain, loss of appetite;feeling tired or irritable;headache; ormuscle pain.This is not a complete list of side effects and others may occur. Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report vaccine side effects to the US Department of Health and Human Services at 1-800-822-7967.Back to TopYou should not receive a booster vaccine if you had a life-threatening allergic reaction after the first dose.Keep track of any and all side effects you have after receiving this vaccine. If you ever have to receive another H1N1 influenza virus vaccine in the future, you will need to tell the doctor if the first vaccine caused any side effects.Get emergency medical help if you have any of these signs of an allergic reaction: hives; difficulty breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.Call your doctor at once if you have any of these serious side effects:wheezing, trouble breathing;weakness, numbness or tingly feeling in your feet and spreading upward; orhigh fever, chills, body aches, flu symptoms.Less serious side effects can last a day or two after you receive this vaccine and may include:runny or stuffy nose, sneezing;low fever;stomach pain, loss of appetite;feeling tired or irritable;headache; ormuscle pain.This is not a complete list of side effects and others may occur. Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report vaccine side effects to the US Department of Health and Human Services at 1-800-822-7967.Back to TopKeep track of any and all side effects you have after receiving this vaccine. If you ever have to receive another H1N1 influenza virus vaccine in the future, you will need to tell the doctor if the first vaccine caused any side effects.Get emergency medical help if you have any of these signs of an allergic reaction: hives; difficulty breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.Call your doctor at once if you have any of these serious side effects:wheezing, trouble breathing;weakness, numbness or tingly feeling in your feet and spreading upward; orhigh fever, chills, body aches, flu symptoms.Less serious side effects can last a day or two after you receive this vaccine and may include:runny or stuffy nose, sneezing;low fever;stomach pain, loss of appetite;feeling tired or irritable;headache; ormuscle pain.This is not a complete list of side effects and others may occur. Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report vaccine side effects to the US Department of Health and Human Services at 1-800-822-7967.Back to TopGet emergency medical help if you have any of these signs of an allergic reaction: hives; difficulty breathing; swelling of your face, lips, tongue, or throat.Call your doctor at once if you have any of these serious side effects:wheezing, trouble breathing;weakness, numbness or tingly feeling in your feet and spreading upward; orhigh fever, chills, body aches, flu symptoms.Less serious side effects can last a day or two after you receive this vaccine and may include:runny or stuffy nose, sneezing;low fever;stomach pain, loss of appetite;feeling tired or irritable;headache; ormuscle pain.This is not a complete list of side effects and others may occur. Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report vaccine side effects to the US Department of Health and Human Services at 1-800-822-7967.Back to TopCall your doctor at once if you have any of these serious side effects:wheezing, trouble breathing;weakness, numbness or tingly feeling in your feet and spreading upward; orhigh fever, chills, body aches, flu symptoms.Less serious side effects can last a day or two after you receive this vaccine and may include:runny or stuffy nose, sneezing;low fever;stomach pain, loss of appetite;feeling tired or irritable;headache; ormuscle pain.This is not a complete list of side effects and others may occur. Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report vaccine side effects to the US Department of Health and Human Services at 1-800-822-7967.Back to TopLess serious side effects can last a day or two after you receive this vaccine and may include:runny or stuffy nose, sneezing;low fever;stomach pain, loss of appetite;feeling tired or irritable;headache; ormuscle pain.This is not a complete list of side effects and others may occur. Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report vaccine side effects to the US Department of Health and Human Services at 1-800-822-7967.Back to TopThis is not a complete list of side effects and others may occur. Call your doctor for medical advice about side effects. You may report vaccine side effects to the US Department of Health and Human Services at 1-800-822-7967.Back to TopFor at least 2 weeks after receiving this vaccine, avoid using antiviral medications that are normally used to treat flu symptoms, such as oseltamivir (Tamiflu) or zanamivir (Relenza).Before receiving this vaccine, tell the doctor about all other vaccines you have recently received.Also tell the doctor if you have recently received drugs or treatments that can weaken the immune system, including:an oral, nasal, inhaled, or injectable steroid medicine;medications to treat psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, or other autoimmune disorders, such as azathioprine (Imuran), efalizumab (Raptiva), etanercept (Enbrel), leflunomide (Arava), and others; ormedicines to treat or prevent organ transplant rejection, such as basiliximab (Simulect), cyclosporine (Sandimmune, Neoral, Gengraf), muromonab-CD3 (Orthoclone), mycophenolate mofetil (CellCept), sirolimus (Rapamune), or tacrolimus (Prograf).This list is not complete and there may be other drugs that can affect this vaccine. Tell your doctor about all the prescription and over-the-counter medications you have received. This includes vitamins, minerals, herbal products, and drugs prescribed by other doctors. Do not start using a new medication without telling your doctor.Back to TopBefore receiving this vaccine, tell the doctor about all other vaccines you have recently received.Also tell the doctor if you have recently received drugs or treatments that can weaken the immune system, including:an oral, nasal, inhaled, or injectable steroid medicine;medications to treat psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, or other autoimmune disorders, such as azathioprine (Imuran), efalizumab (Raptiva), etanercept (Enbrel), leflunomide (Arava), and others; ormedicines to treat or prevent organ transplant rejection, such as basiliximab (Simulect), cyclosporine (Sandimmune, Neoral, Gengraf), muromonab-CD3 (Orthoclone), mycophenolate mofetil (CellCept), sirolimus (Rapamune), or tacrolimus (Prograf).This list is not complete and there may be other drugs that can affect this vaccine. Tell your doctor about all the prescription and over-the-counter medications you have received. This includes vitamins, minerals, herbal products, and drugs prescribed by other doctors. Do not start using a new medication without telling your doctor.Back to TopAlso tell the doctor if you have recently received drugs or treatments that can weaken the immune system, including:an oral, nasal, inhaled, or injectable steroid medicine;medications to treat psoriasis, rheumatoid arthritis, or other autoimmune disorders, such as azathioprine (Imuran), efalizumab (Raptiva), etanercept (Enbrel), leflunomide (Arava), and others; ormedicines to treat or prevent organ transplant rejection, such as basiliximab (Simulect), cyclosporine (Sandimmune, Neoral, Gengraf), muromonab-CD3 (Orthoclone), mycophenolate mofetil (CellCept), sirolimus (Rapamune), or tacrolimus (Prograf).This list is not complete and there may be other drugs that can affect this vaccine. Tell your doctor about all the prescription and over-the-counter medications you have received. This includes vitamins, minerals, herbal products, and drugs prescribed by other doctors. Do not start using a new medication without telling your doctor.Back to TopThis list is not complete and there may be other drugs that can affect this vaccine. Tell your doctor about all the prescription and over-the-counter medications you have received. This includes vitamins, minerals, herbal products, and drugs prescribed by other doctors. Do not start using a new medication without telling your doctor.Back to TopThis vaccine is given as a nasal spray into each nostril. Your doctor, nurse, or other healthcare provider will give you this vaccine.Children younger than 10 years old should receive two doses of H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine spaced one month apart. Older children and adults are usually given only one dose.Your doctor may recommend treating fever and pain with an aspirin-free pain reliever such as acetaminophen (Tylenol) or ibuprofen (Motrin, Advil, and others) after the vaccine is given. Follow the label directions or your doctor's instructions about how much of this medicine to take.It is especially important to prevent fever from occurring if you have a seizure disorder such as epilepsy.An overdose of this vaccine is unlikely to occur.If your child misses a booster dose of this vaccine, call your doctor for instructions.Be sure to receive all doses of this vaccine recommended by your healthcare provider or by the health department of the state where you live. If you do not receive the full series of vaccines, you may not be fully protected against the disease.Back to TopChildren younger than 10 years old should receive two doses of H1N1 influenza virus nasal vaccine spaced one month apart. Older children and adults are usually given only one dose.Your doctor may recommend treating fever and pain with an aspirin-free pain reliever such as acetaminophen (Tylenol) or ibuprofen (Motrin, Advil, and others) after the vaccine is given. Follow the label directions or your doctor's instructions about how much of this medicine to take.It is especially important to prevent fever from occurring if you have a seizure disorder such as epilepsy.An overdose of this vaccine is unlikely to occur.If your child misses a booster dose of this vaccine, call your doctor for instructions.Be sure to receive all doses of this vaccine recommended by your healthcare provider or by the health department of the state where you live. If you do not receive the full series of vaccines, you may not be fully protected against the disease.Back to TopYour doctor may recommend treating fever and pain with an aspirin-free pain reliever such as acetaminophen (Tylenol) or ibuprofen (Motrin, Advil, and others) after the vaccine is given. Follow the label directions or your doctor's instructions about how much of this medicine to take.It is especially important to prevent fever from occurring if you have a seizure disorder such as epilepsy.An overdose of this vaccine is unlikely to occur.If your child misses a booster dose of this vaccine, call your doctor for instructions.Be sure to receive all doses of this vaccine recommended by your healthcare provider or by the health department of the state where you live. If you do not receive the full series of vaccines, you may not be fully protected against the disease.Back to TopIt is especially important to prevent fever from occurring if you have a seizure disorder such as epilepsy.An overdose of this vaccine is unlikely to occur.If your child misses a booster dose of this vaccine, call your doctor for instructions.Be sure to receive all doses of this vaccine recommended by your healthcare provider or by the health department of the state where you live. If you do not receive the full series of vaccines, you may not be fully protected against the disease.Back to TopAn overdose of this vaccine is unlikely to occur.If your child misses a booster dose of this vaccine, call your doctor for instructions.Be sure to receive all doses of this vaccine recommended by your healthcare provider or by the health department of the state where you live. If you do not receive the full series of vaccines, you may not be fully protected against the disease.Back to TopIf your child misses a booster dose of this vaccine, call your doctor for instructions.Be sure to receive all doses of this vaccine recommended by your healthcare provider or by the health department of the state where you live. If you do not receive the full series of vaccines, you may not be fully protected against the disease.Back to TopBe sure to receive all doses of this vaccine recommended by your healthcare provider or by the health department of the state where you live. If you do not receive the full series of vaccines, you may not be fully protected against the disease.Back to TopLatest Update: 2017-09-15  Copyright © 2014 Everyday Health Media, LLCDrugs A-Z provides drug information from Everyday Health and our partners, as well as ratings from our members, all in one place. Cerner Multum™ provides the data within some of the Basics, Side Effects, Interactions, and Dosage tabs. The information within the Reviews and FAQ tabs is proprietary to Everyday Health.You can browse Drugs A-Z for a specific prescription or over-the-counter drug or look up drugs based on your specific condition. This information is for educational purposes only, and not meant to provide medical advice, treatment, or diagnosis. Remember to always consult your physician or health care provider before starting, stopping, or altering a treatment or health care regimen.Every effort has been made to ensure that the information provided by on this page is accurate, up-to-date, and complete, but no guarantee is made to that effect. Drug information contained herein may be time sensitive. The information on this page has been compiled for use by healthcare practitioners and consumers in the United States and therefore neither Everyday Health or its licensor warrant that uses outside of the United States are appropriate, unless specifically indicated otherwise. Neither Everyday Health nor its licensors endorse drugs, diagnose patients or recommend therapy. The drug information above is an informational resource designed to assist licensed healthcare practitioners in caring for their patients and/or to serve consumers viewing this service as a supplement to, and not a substitute for, the expertise, skill, knowledge and judgment of healthcare practitioners. The absence of a warning for a given drug or drug combination in no way should be construed to indicate that the drug or combination is safe, effective or appropriate for any given patient. Neither Everyday Health nor its licensor assume any responsibility for any aspect of healthcare administered with the aid of the information provided. The information contained herein is not intended to cover all possible uses, directions, precautions, warnings, drug interactions, allergic reactions, or adverse effects. If you have any questions about the drugs you are taking, check with your doctor, nurse or pharmacist.You can browse Drugs A-Z for a specific prescription or over-the-counter drug or look up drugs based on your specific condition. This information is for educational purposes only, and not meant to provide medical advice, treatment, or diagnosis. Remember to always consult your physician or health care provider before starting, stopping, or altering a treatment or health care regimen.Every effort has been made to ensure that the information provided by on this page is accurate, up-to-date, and complete, but no guarantee is made to that effect. Drug information contained herein may be time sensitive. The information on this page has been compiled for use by healthcare practitioners and consumers in the United States and therefore neither Everyday Health or its licensor warrant that uses outside of the United States are appropriate, unless specifically indicated otherwise. Neither Everyday Health nor its licensors endorse drugs, diagnose patients or recommend therapy. The drug information above is an informational resource designed to assist licensed healthcare practitioners in caring for their patients and/or to serve consumers viewing this service as a supplement to, and not a substitute for, the expertise, skill, knowledge and judgment of healthcare practitioners. The absence of a warning for a given drug or drug combination in no way should be construed to indicate that the drug or combination is safe, effective or appropriate for any given patient. Neither Everyday Health nor its licensor assume any responsibility for any aspect of healthcare administered with the aid of the information provided. The information contained herein is not intended to cover all possible uses, directions, precautions, warnings, drug interactions, allergic reactions, or adverse effects. If you have any questions about the drugs you are taking, check with your doctor, nurse or pharmacist.Every effort has been made to ensure that the information provided by on this page is accurate, up-to-date, and complete, but no guarantee is made to that effect. Drug information contained herein may be time sensitive. The information on this page has been compiled for use by healthcare practitioners and consumers in the United States and therefore neither Everyday Health or its licensor warrant that uses outside of the United States are appropriate, unless specifically indicated otherwise. Neither Everyday Health nor its licensors endorse drugs, diagnose patients or recommend therapy. The drug information above is an informational resource designed to assist licensed healthcare practitioners in caring for their patients and/or to serve consumers viewing this service as a supplement to, and not a substitute for, the expertise, skill, knowledge and judgment of healthcare practitioners. The absence of a warning for a given drug or drug combination in no way should be construed to indicate that the drug or combination is safe, effective or appropriate for any given patient. Neither Everyday Health nor its licensor assume any responsibility for any aspect of healthcare administered with the aid of the information provided. The information contained herein is not intended to cover all possible uses, directions, precautions, warnings, drug interactions, allergic reactions, or adverse effects. If you have any questions about the drugs you are taking, check with your doctor, nurse or pharmacist.CDC H1N1 Flu | Vaccine General InfoContent on this page was developed during the 2009-2010 H1N1 pandemic and has not been updated.This  season, vaccines to protect against the 2009 H1N1 virus (sometimes called  “swine flu”) have been produced. Like seasonal flu vaccines, there are two  kinds of 2009 H1N1 vaccines: a "flu shot ";  that is given with a needle, usually in the arm; and a nasal spray flu  vaccine. The same manufacturers that produce seasonal flu vaccines also  produced the vaccines against the pandemic 2009 H1N1 virus in the same way that  the seasonal vaccines are made. Vaccines to protect against 2009 H1N1 are  widely available. CDC is now encouraging everyone to get vaccinated against  2009 H1N1, including people  65 years and older. Learn More…
Explains the benefits and risks of the vaccines, as well as who should get vaccinated.To receive weekly email updates about this site, enter your email address:How do I view different file formats (PDF, DOC, PPT, MPEG) on this site? Nightmares, narcolepsy and sudden weakness turn Mary's life upside down after swine flu vaccination - Independent.ie
Monday 18 February 2019

Alan O’Keeffe

February 17 2019 4:04 PM

On her short car journey to work, Mary Minchin often had to stop her car three or four times and pace up and down on the road to fight a sudden desire to sleep.
On other days on her drive home, she would ‘get lost’ and end up driving in the wrong direction.“At first, I thought I was just exhausted but soon I felt something was very wrong,” she said.Sleep at night brought her no solace as terrible nightmares and hallucinations tormented her. During her waking hours, seizures would cause her to lose control of her body and she would fall down, unable to move though still fully conscious.Mary Minchin was 57 when her life was “turned upside down”.She told the Sunday Independent she is one of around 100 people in Ireland who suffered serious health problems after being inoculated with the swine flu vaccine, Pandemrix, around a decade ago.These were ‘the unlucky ones’ out of the large number of people who received the vaccine with no ill effects.Around 80pc of suspected victims of Pandemrix were children and adolescents. Many are afflicted with narcolepsy — a long-term neurological disorder which causes sufferers to fall asleep suddenly as well as cataplexy, sudden muscle weakness causing people to collapse while remaining conscious, typically triggered by emotions such as laughing, crying, or fear.Mary’s devastating symptoms of narcolepsy and cataplexy began in the weeks after she was given the Pandemrix vaccine in January 2010. She was diagnosed with these two linked conditions by a medical consultant a few months later.Pandemrix was later withdrawn from use after studies showed higher than normal rates of adverse reactions, including potential links to narcolepsy.“I am pleading with Health Minister Simon Harris, the Government, and the HSE to stop resisting the efforts of victims who are trying to get funds in compensation to pay for the care we need,” said Mary.Like many others who testify that they were afflicted by devastating side-effects, she is suing the State, the Minister, and the makers of the vaccine GlaxoSmithKline (GSK).Mary wants to raise public awareness of these medical conditions and what happened to those who had adverse reactions to Pandemrix.Her son Richard (38) said: “This condition has destroyed my mother’s life and has had a profound impact on all of us within the family in many different ways. I sympathise with all the other families that have fallen victim to this.”Mary and Richard said they acknowledge the importance of health vaccination programmes generally but there must be justice to provide care when harm is inflicted.Mary (65) lives on her family farm near Leighlinbridge, Co Carlow. A mother-of-four, she had worked for the HSE and the Irish Wheelchair Association by providing personal care for ill people in their own homes. She did the job from 2004, until forced by her illness to quit in 2010.Mary said she was strongly advised by the HSE that she should get the swine flu vaccine because she was a health worker visiting vulnerable patients, but she was not warned of side effects, she said.None of her colleagues suffered the devastating side effects that struck Mary. A normally healthy woman, who was happy to volunteer as secretary of the County Carlow Irish Farmers’ Association, her life deteriorated dramatically.As time passed after receiving the vaccine, Mary began to feel “utterly exhausted”. Then, a couple of weeks later, Mary was dining in a Dublin restaurant when she suddenly fell fast asleep. A woman at the table told her son Richard: “We mustn’t be very good company. Your mother has fallen asleep.”But Mary soon began to be overwhelmed by sleep while at work, during social occasions, while driving or at home. On one occasion, she was taking notes at a work meeting but was embarrassed to discover she had written nothing only indecipherable “scribbles”.At night, she was beset by hallucinations and terrifying nightmares. Her husband John, who died two years ago, was very upset by her night distress. She still suffers nightmares.With her diagnosis in 2010, she had to give up work and give up driving after narcolepsy severely impaired her abilities. She was given an invalidity pension and a medical card.She has collapsed on a number of occasions while out shopping, resulting in ambulances being called. At home, when she feels she is going to be overwhelmed by tiredness or weakness, she will swiftly lie down on a couch.Although she is on several medications, she cannot be left alone for long periods. Her four adult children share in the care of their mother. She can no longer socialise because of the likelihood of her collapsing.Her solicitor, Lucan-based Elizabeth Howard, told this newspaper her lawsuit seeks to address the terrible suffering being endured by Mary. The lawyer said the State should introduce a ‘no-fault’ tribunal to allow payments to fund care of the victims. The State should end its adversarial approach which forces victims to seek to prove negligence on the part of the State, she said.The State indemnified the pharmaceutical company against legal actions as part of routine preparations before the vaccines were distributed. Ms Howard said she will wait for the outcome of legal proceedings being taken by another law firm, Augustus Cullen Law, on behalf of one of its clients with narcolepsy, which is due to begin in the High Court next October.A spokesman for Augustus Cullen Law said the State and the vaccine makers continue to deny liability, and even deny that the vaccine increased the chance of developing narcolepsy, despite such a link being acknowledged in the scientific and medical community.In 2015, a British court awarded £120,000 to a 12-year-old boy after ruling he was left disabled by narcolepsy caused by Pandemrix.An Irish group named SOUND — ‘Sufferers of Unique Narcolepsy Disorder’ — said the State is “morally bound” to provide children and adults damaged by Pandemrix with lifelong care and support.Orexin/hypocretin in the human brain acts as the regulator of sleep, wakefulness and appetite.SOUND claimed Pandemrix caused the immune system of sufferers to mistake orexin/hypocretin in the brain for the swine flu virus, causing the hypocretin to be “decimated”.
Sunday Independent
Eilish O'Regan A rare form of deadly meningitis is on the rise in Ireland following a pattern seen in other countries, disease specialists have revealed.Ralph Riegel The number of people presenting with symptoms of narcolepsy from the swine flu vaccine Pandemrix has soared by more than 20pc in the wake of an Irish Independent exposé.Laura Lynott The National Maternity Hospital has advertised posts for consultants in anaesthesia, obstetrics and gynaecology for those "willing to contribute to the provision of termination of pregnancy services".
"In times like... 
A body has been found during the search for a Co... 
More than 60 members of the Defence Forces... 
A thriving Sligo community is to consider taking a... 
Threats to the environment proved the inspiration for... 
One of the founding members of the controversial group which targeted drug... 
Gardaí issued a warning about the activities of online... 
Almost 85pc of people believe the Public Services Card... 
Bishops and the Vatican must own up to past failings on protecting children from... 
Fianna Fáil is set for big gains in the European elections, according to analysis complied by... 
Residents of Rooskey, on the Leitrim/Roscommon border, clashed with anti-... 
Protesters who targeted the home of Health Minister Simon Harris last weekend are... 
Gardai and LUAS staff at the scene on Cookstown... 
Home owners showed up to protest the... 
Patrick Quirke, Imelda Quirke and Garda... 
Prince Charles and Camilla joined President... © Independent.ie Surge of 20pc in narcolepsy cases is linked to swine flu jab as families seek damages - Independent.ie
Monday 18 February 2019

Ralph Riegel
Twitter
Email

February 18 2019 2:30 AM

The number of people presenting with symptoms of narcolepsy from the swine flu vaccine Pandemrix has soared by more than 20pc in the wake of an Irish Independent exposé.
Support group Sound said they were dealing with around 100 families whose children had taken Pandemrix but more than 20 new families have contacted them in the past six months.A major Irish Independent investigation in August revealed some children received a double dose of Pandemrix when swine flu vaccine stocks were used from January 2011 amid fears of a winter flu jab shortfall.Thousands received a single vaccine dose in 2009/2010.But the 2011 re-issue was almost two years after research data showed indicators that Pandemrix had, in the case of narcolepsy/cataplexy, up to 13 times higher rate of adverse incidents than other vaccines."We still do not know how many Irish children received Pandemrix when it was re-issued in 2011," Sound co-founder Tom Matthews said. "After 10 years we were shocked to find that some of the new cases involved previously undiagnosed narcolepsy."Despite assurances given eight years ago, the route to rapid diagnosis has clearly not been streamlined, as is proved by the emerging number of sufferers."UntestedA test case is due before the High Court in October with many of the 75 actions being handled by solicitors Michael Boylan and Gillian O'Connor."The fact that the general public were not made aware by the Health Minister or HSE that Pandemrix was untested, prior to or even during the vaccination programme as adverse data emerged, is one of the reasons why we have now served the State defendants with claims for aggravated and exemplary damages," Ms O'Connor said."It is a scandal and totally unacceptable that our clients have had to fight tooth and nail for appropriate redress for the dreadful injuries caused for the past eight years given that this information has been within the defendants knowledge all this time."
Irish Independent
Laura Lynott The National Maternity Hospital has advertised posts for consultants in anaesthesia, obstetrics and gynaecology for those "willing to contribute to the provision of termination of pregnancy services".Eilish O'Regan A rare form of deadly meningitis is on the rise in Ireland following a pattern seen in other countries, disease specialists have revealed.Philip Ryan The Government is moving to shift blame for the National Children's Hospital debacle on to "highly paid" consultancy firms which provided advice before construction on the controversial project...
"In times like... 
A thriving Sligo community is to consider taking a... 
Threats to the environment proved the inspiration for... 
One of the founding members of the controversial group which targeted drug... 
Gardaí issued a warning about the activities of online... 
Construction firm BAM gave the Taoiseach just over... 
Almost 85pc of people believe the Public Services Card... 
Bishops and the Vatican must own up to past failings on protecting children from... 
Two Irishmen who have been missing in the UK... 
Fianna Fáil is set for big gains in the European elections, according to analysis complied by... 
Residents of Rooskey, on the Leitrim/Roscommon border, clashed with anti-... 
Protesters who targeted the home of Health Minister Simon Harris last weekend are... 
Gardai and LUAS staff at the scene on Cookstown... 
Home owners showed up to protest the... 
Patrick Quirke, Imelda Quirke and Garda... 
Prince Charles and Camilla joined President... © Independent.ie Rajasthan, Delhi lead India’s swine flu surge | india news | Hindustan Times Swine flu (H1N1) cases are projected to cross 10,000 this week, with 2,666 new cases in just one week ending February 10, taking India’s H1N1 count to 9,367 in the first 40 days of 2019. There have been 312 deaths.While this year has registered a sharp spike in cases in February as compared to all of 2018, when there were 14,992 recorded cases and 1,103 deaths, the virus has not turned any more deadly than it was last year. Yet, so huge is the panic that isolation and fever wards in all Delhi hospitals, both public and private, are overflowing, with everyone testing positive for H1N1 insisting on being admitted and treated.Isolation wards and treating everyone with H1N1 with anti-virals like Tamiflu are not needed, say leading pulmonary medicine experts and virologists who recommend India must shift from a pandemic response to a programme approach to contain annual seasonal flu infections that hit 5-10% of the adult population each year.The H1N1 virus has transitioned from a pandemic strain to a seasonal flu strain that poses no additional risk of complications and death than the other three circulating flu viruses. “We don’t need isolation wards, everyone with H1N1 doesn’t need to be tested and treated. It is no longer a novel pandemic virus that people had no immunity against in 2009-10. Most of us by now have been infected with H1N1, developed mild fever and recovered without being tested or treated,” said Dr Randeep Guleria, director, All India Institute of Medical Sciences. “I just had a patient with H1N1 insisting on getting admitted to hospital, even after I told he didn’t need treatment and should just go home,” he said.“What we need is infection control measures used to contain any other infections, such as tuberculosis,” said Dr Guleria, who is a professor of pulmonology at AIIMS and a member of the World Health Organization’s.(WHO) Scientific Advisory Group of Experts on influenza vaccination for emerging markets. “Instead of focusing on testing and treating one seasonal viral strain, India now needs to focus on classifying the severity of illness, as the treatment for severe illness from all four viruses infections remains the same – vaccinating people within 48 hours of infection, using anti-virals and giving ICU and ECMO support, when needed,”  Dr Guleria added. ECMO, or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation, provides heart-lung bypass support by pumping oxygenated blood into the body to people undergoing bypass surgery or for those in acute respiratory distress.According to WHO, 98.3% flu infections are caused by influenza A, of which H1N1 accounts for 77.7% infections, and H3N2 for 22.3%. In India, people with flu are tested only for H1N1, with H3N2 testing done for only research purposes.“H1N1 is no more deadly than the other three influenza viruses — H3N2, B Victoria lineage, and B Yamagata lineage — causing seasonal flu in 2019; it’s just more feared because it’s the only flu virus people hospitalised with flu-related complications are tested for,” said Dr Anil K Prasad, former professor of virology at Patel Chest Institute and chairman of the Influenza Foundation of India.With dominant strains changing almost every year, WHO tracks global flu outbreaks and recommends a new vaccine each year against the most dominant strains. For 2018-19, WHO has recommended the quadrivalent vaccine, which protects against A/Michigan H1N1, A/Singapore H3N2; B/Colorado (B/Victoria lineage), and B/Phuket (B/Yamagata lineage).While several developed countries recommend everyone get vaccinated against the dominant flu strains, Dr Guleria recommends prioritising vaccination to protect people most at risk. These include pregnant women, where vaccination protects the mother, the foetus and the newborn up to six months after birth; people with who are immune-compromised because of chronic medical conditions such as respiratory diseases, heart disease, diabetes, cancer, renal failure, liver cirrhosis and neurological conditions; and health professionals in transplantation and oncology wards.“All health workers must get vaccinated as they risk infecting immuno-compromised patients. I ensure everyone in my department gets vaccinated every year, I got my flu shot while I was treating patients in OPD,” said Dr Guleria, who is a professor of pulmonology at AIIMS and a member of the World Health Organization’s Scientific Advisory Group of Experts on immunization and influenza vaccination for emerging markets.Seasonal flu outbreaks have two peaks in India, once post winter from January to March, and the second from July to September. “Most people have no complications, but the ones at risk must be protected with vaccination,” said Dr Prasad, who advocated a single vaccine for the world, instead of two different ones approved by the WHO for the northern and southern hemisphere.“With growing population, rapid urbanisation and mass transport, viruses travel across hemispheres within a few hours. Infection is no longer seasonal and people are at risk 365 days a year. I recommend annual flu vaccination for people at risk all through the year,” said Dr Prasad.
First Published: Feb 16, 2019 07:33 IST
