Learn About the H1N1 Swine Flu Vaccines - on RxListCopyright © 2018 by RxList Inc. RxList does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.Dr. Ogbru received his Doctorate in Pharmacy from the University of the Pacific School of Pharmacy in 1995. He completed a Pharmacy Practice Residency at the University of Arizona/University Medical Center in 1996. He was a Professor of Pharmacy Practice and a Regional Clerkship Coordinator for the University of the Pacific School of Pharmacy from 1996-99.Jay W. Marks, MD, is a board-certified internist and gastroenterologist. He graduated from Yale University School of Medicine and trained in internal medicine and gastroenterology at UCLA/Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los Angeles.
home > h1n1 swine flu vaccines article
                        Natural Cold & Flu Remedies SlideshowAnatomy of a Sore Throat SlideshowFlu Slideshow: 10 Foods to Eat When You Have the FluThe Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recently approved 
the H1N1 vaccine as an injection and an intranasal spray made by CSL, Sanofi 
Pasteur, MedImmune and Novartis. The H1N1 vaccines are manufactured using the same vaccine 
manufacturing processes used for the regular seasonal flu vaccines and the H1N1 
vaccines should be as safe and as effective as the regular seasonal flu 
vaccines. The difference between regular flu vaccines and H1N1 vaccines is the virus that is used in the manufacturing process. Regular flu 
vaccine does not contain components of the 2009 H1N1 virus. Regular flu vaccines do not protect against H1N1, and H1N1 vaccines will not protect against the 
regular flu.The following groups should receive H1N1 vaccine as soon as possible:Other groups should be vaccinated as more vaccine becomes available.Injectable H1N1 vaccines are manufactured by CSL, Sanofi Pasteur or Novartis. They are inactivated H1N1 
virus vaccines used for immunization of individuals 6 months of age and older against influenza disease caused by H1N1 2009 virus. Injectable H1N1 vaccine 
will not cause influenza because the virus in it is inactivated though it still stimulates the immune system to form antibodies against the H1N1 virus. 
The likelihood of the H1N1 vaccines causing 
serious harm is extremely small. The risk of adverse events from injectable H1N1 
vaccine is similar to seasonal inactivated flu vaccine. Mild adverse events that 
usually begin shortly after administration and last 1-2 days include soreness, 
redness, tenderness, or swelling at the injection site, fainting (mainly 
adolescents), headache, muscle aches, fever, and nausea.Rarely, some individuals may experience severe allergic reactions that present as difficulty breathing, hoarseness or 
wheezing, hives, paleness, weakness, a fast heart beat or dizziness. A doctor 
should be consulted immediately if such symptoms occur. Injectable H1N1 vaccine should not be administered to 
individuals hypersensitive to eggs or chicken protein (since the vaccine is manufactured in eggs) neomycin or polymyxin (antibiotics that are used in the 
production of the vaccine), or anyone who has had a life-threatening reaction to flu vaccination.Individuals older than 10 years of age should receive a single shot while children nine years old and younger may 
require two shots one month apart. Injectable H1N1 vaccine may be adminstered to pregnant or breastfeeding women and also may be administered with other 
vaccines.The nasal spray vaccine is made with live, weakened viruses that cannot grow at normal body temperature. The H1N1 nasal 
spray vaccine is manufactured by MedImmune in the same way as the seasonal nasal spray vaccine (Flumist), but instead of containing three weakened live flu 
viruses, it contains weakened 2009 H1N1 flu virus.Intranasal flu vaccine is used for prevention of the flu caused by H1N1 virus in healthy individuals 2 to 49 years 
of age. It should not be administered to people younger than 2 years or older than 50 years; pregnant women; those with chronic illnesses (for example, 
chronic heart or lung disease, diabetes or kidney failure); people with reduced immune function, or taking medications that weaken the immune system; and 
individuals allergic to chicken eggs or any of the components of the vaccine.
Side effects of intranasal vaccine can include runny nose, headache, wheezing, vomiting, muscle aches, fever, headache, sore throat, and cough.Individuals 2-9 years of age require 2 doses while individuals 10 years and older require one dose of intranasal H1N1 vaccine.References:
Pill Identifier Tool Quick, Easy, Pill IdentificationDrug Interaction Tool Check Potential Drug InteractionsPharmacy Locater Tool Including 24 Hour, PharmaciesCopyright © 2019 by RxList Inc. RxList does not provide medical advice, diagnosis or treatment. See additional information.